## ValueObject

A value object is an object that once constructed cannot be changed. It has getters, but no setters. Also, it doesn't do any business logic at all. It truly is an object that holds values - and nothing more.

```json
    {
      "type": "valueObject",
      "name": "Recipe",
      "values": {
        "title": "string",
        "minutesToPrepare": "?int",
        "rating": "float",
        "dietStyle": "DietStyle"
      },
      "string_value": "title"
    }
```

The properties are similar to those of the Enum. The `values` object follows the `"identifier": "datatype"` syntax.

If you don't want to specify a datatype, simply provide an empty string.

Notice that you may also define nullable types and object types. You'll have to provide the namespace to the object, but in this case, "DietStyle" hast the same namespace as "Recipe".

#### result

Vog will generate private class members according to the definition in the value file.

```php
final class Recipe
{
    private string $title;
    private ?int $minutesToPrepare;
    private float $rating;
    private DietStyle $dietStyle;
```

The members are available by getter functions:

```php
    public function getTitle(): string {
        return $this->title;
    }
```

As it is an immutable value object per default, there are no setters. Instead, you'll have to create entirely new objects if you want to alter a value. This is made easy by the `with_` methods:

```php
    public function withTitle (string $title):self
    {
        return new self($title,$this->minutes_to_prepare,$this->rating,$this->diet_style,);
    }
```

`with` methods will be generated for each member defined in the value file.

If you declare your object `"mutable": true`, it will have `with` methods in addition to setters `setTitle(string $title)` to ensure compatibility.

### Instantiating a generated valueObject

You can use the constructor to create a new instance providing all required parameters.

```php
    public function __construct (string $title, ?int $minutesToPrepare, float $rating, DietStyle $dietStyle)
    {
        $this->title = $title;
        $this->minutesToPrepare = $minutesToPrepare;
        $this->rating = $rating;
        $this->dietStyle = $dietStyle;
    }
```

#### fromArray

A value object can also be created from the static `fromArray()` method.  The keys of the array must match the property names.

```php
$obj = new Recipe::fromArray([
    'title' => 'Title',
    'minutesToPrepare' => null,
    'rating' => 10,
    'dietStyle' => DietStyle::VEGAN()
]);
```

#### toArray

A value object may also be converted into an associative array, for example for data transfer purposes. Note that this is a **deep conversion**, so any non-primitive member will be serialized.

This is ensured by first checking the non-primitive member for a `toArray()` function. If it does have one, this function is called.

If it does not have one, the value is casted to string.

Since all elements generated by vog either have a `toArray` method or a fitting implementation of `__toString()`, no strange effects occur when building vog value objects solely on vog generated elements. However, use that function with caution when mixing other objects into vog value objects!

### other methods

```php
    /** Compares two enums of the same type for equality */
    public function equals(?self $other): bool
```

If you define `string_value` for your value object the following methods are added.

```php
    /** Returns the string_value of the value object*/
    public function toString(): string

    /** Same as toString() */
    public function __toString(): string
```

### DateTime Support

Vog does support DateTimeImmutables as strings in `toArray` and `fromArray`!
Just set `\\DateTimeImmutable` (double backslash necessary for escaping) as the data type and vog takes care of the rest.

The default format is `Y-m-d`, yet that can be changed both [globally](#Configuration) and [individually](#generic-properties)

for each object.

`\\\DateTime` is also possible, but only when the value object is explicitly declared mutable. Otherwise vog will throw an exception.